In this lesson we'll be talking
about how to use the vi editor.
While nano is great for
simple edits, vi and
Emacs have more advanced and
powerful features.
There'll be a learning curve to using
these editors as they're not exactly
intuitive.
Learning vi will definitely be
harder than say, learning nano.
It will require a bit of a time
investment to become proficient.
To use the vi editor,
simply type vi, Space, and
the file name that you want to edit.
You can also use vim, Space, file name.
Vim stands for vi improved.
It's compatible with all
the commands found at vi, however,
it has some additional features,
like syntax highlighting and
ability to edit files over the network.
On many Linux distributions,
when you type vi you're actually
running vim or vi improved.
If you wanna view a file but make sure
you don't change any of it's contents,
you can use the view command.
I'd like to point out that
an advantage of using vi
is that it's always
available on a Linux system.
Another advantage is that once you
learn the key mappings for vi,
you can apply them to other commands,
like man, or more, or less, or
view, or you can even use vi mode for
editing shell commands.
Vi has the concept of modes.
You are always working in one of three
modes, Command mode, Insert mode, or
Line mode.
When vi starts you are placed
into Command mode.
To get back to Command mode at
anytime simply hit the Esc key.
Letters typed while in Command
mode are not sent to the file,
but they are interpreted as commands.
Command mode allows you to navigate about
the file, perform searches, delete text,
copy text, and paste text.
Here are some of the commonly used
key bindings with navigation and
Command mode: k goes up one line, j,
down, h, left, l, right one character,
to move right one word, w,
b moves it back one word or left one word.
The caret symbol takes you
to the beginning of the line
while the dollar symbol takes
you to the end of the line.
This graphic shows how the h, j, k, and
l keys act as the arrow keys in vi.
In order to insert text in a file,
enter vi's Insert mode.
Do this by pressing lowercase i,
uppercase I, lowercase a, or uppercase A.
The lowercase i inserts text at
the current cursor position.
Capital I inserts texts at
the beginning of the line,
a appends after the cursor position, [and]
capital A appends to the end of the line.
To use vi as a Line mode,
begin a command with colon.
For example, to write the file or
save the file, type :w inner.
To force a file to be saved, type :w!
To quit, :q.
To force quit, :q!
To save the file and quit or
write and quit, :wq!
And :x is the same as wq.
Line mode can be used for navigation too.
If you wanna go to line 15 in a file,
type :15 enter.
To go to the last of the file, type :$.
If you want to see line numbers,
type :set nu.
And to turn off line numbering, :set nonu.
To get help, type :help, and
the command that you're interested in.
Again, the modes in vi are Command
mode which you can enter
by hitting the Esc key,
Insert mode by using iI or
aA, and Line mode by beginning
commands with a colon character.
You can repeat commands in vi
by preceding them with a number.
For instance, if you'd like to move
the cursor up five lines, simply type 5k.
If you'd like to insert a piece
of text 80 times, type 80i, and
start entering the text.
Once you are done you hit the Esc
key to return to command mode, and
the text you typed will
be repeated 80 times.
This simple feature alone already makes it
much more powerful than the nano editor.
While in Command mode you can use x to
delete a character, dw to delete a word,
dd to delete a line, and capital D to
delete the remaining text on the line.
To replace text, type r for
just one character,
cw to change an entire word,
cc to change an entire line,
c$ to change the text from the current
position to the end of the line.
You can also use capital c for that.
The tilde command reverses
the case of the character.
To yank or copy the current line, type yy.
To yank a position, type y and
a position character.
For instance, to yank a word, type yw.
If you want to repeat this,
you could yank three words with y3w,
[and] p will paste the most
recently deleted or yanked text.
The undo command in vi is u, and
the redo command is CTRL + R.
To start a forward search, type a forward
slash and a search pattern and hit Enter.
To go to the next match, type n.
To go to the previous match,
type capital N.
To start a reverse search,
use the question mark followed by
a search pattern, and then hit Enter.
Let's use vi to edit a file.
You'll notice at the bottom of
the screen you see a series of tildes.
These represent lines
that are beyond the file.
So we start out vi in Command mode, and
we can use the j key to navigate down,
k goes up,
l to the right,
h to the left, caret symbol
goes to the beginning of the line, and the
dollar sign goes to the end of the line.
If we want to enter Insert mode,
we can use lowercase i to insert
text at the current position.
Esc will take us back to Command mode.
To insert text at the very beginning
of the line, shift I for capital I.
To append, we'll just use a, and
then to append to the end
of the line is shift A.
To delete some text we can use
the x to delete a character,
and if we want to delete a word,
we can use dw.
And dd will delete a line.
And a d, capitol D, will delete from the
current position to the end of the line.
To replace text, we can use r.
We'll replace this.
We can replace an entire word with cw for
change word.
Esc to get back to Command mode,
cc to change the entire line.
The tilde changes the case.
So, if it's lowercase,
it will become uppercase.
If it's uppercase,
it will become lowercase.
To yank a line, yy.
To paste, p.
To do a forward search,
type the forward slash and
then lowercase n to move
to the next item and
uppercase N to move to the previous item.
To do a backward search,
start with a question mark.
And to write changes to a file,
we can use w.
Let's enter some more text.
And to quit we can type q.
Now that there's saved changes,
it won't let us stop, so we'll just use q!
to force our quit.
Let's go back in.
Let's turn on line numbering with :set nu.
And we can go to line 10 by typing :10,
or line 5, :5 Enter.
And we'll quit with q.
There's also a tutor that's very nice.
You can run vimtutor and follow along, and
it will take you through some of
the commands and features of vi.
The vi editor is more powerful and
advanced than nano.
However it's not as intuitive, and
it can take some time to learn.
One of the unique things about
vi is the concept of modes.
You're either in Command mode,
Insert mode, or Line mode.